Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
Tellerik create compelling app experiences
across any screen with the
Tellerik platform Telerx end to
end platform. Uniquely combines industry
leading UI tools with cloud
services to simplify the entire
app development cycle Tellerik offers
everything.net developers need to build
quality apps faster. Try it
free at tellerik.com/platform that's tellerik.com/platform.
from hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel
minutes, a weekly discussion with
web developer and technologists. Scott
Hanselman. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number four 73. In
this episode, Scott talks with
dr. Matthew Tesh about developing
staph pad, a new class
of music notation applications. Hi,
this is Scott Hanselman. This
is another episode of Hansel
minutes, and I am chatting
today with dr. Matthew Tez
from Carnegie Mellon. He is
the coauthor of a really
great new windows app called
staph pad that you may
have heard about. Thanks for
chatting with me today. No,
thank you for having me.
This is, this has got
some pretty amazing PR I
don't know who, who made
it go kind of viral,
but this is a really
great app and it's kind
of marketed towards being a
surface exclusive. Although if I
understand correctly, it does work
on any windows eight machine
it'll work on anything with
pen and touch, really active
Pennsport. So that's why the
surface is so perfect. It's
one of the few devices
out there that really brings
that naturally. And what does
staph pad do that just
blows minds? The idea behind
staph pad is it's a
way to compose naturally. And
so it's, if you think
of handwriting recognition, it's that
form music now. So you'll
be able to just hand
write notes into, into a
bar. And as you move
onto the bar, it'll recognize
those and then you can
play them back, edit it.
So it's got a lot
of the features of much
more expensive notation programs that
are fractured with the price.
So this isn't an unknown,
like space. There are handwriting
to music apps existing today.
So there's been a handful
of people that have tried
something with the handwriting to
music approach out there. So
yeah, there's a few in
the space. It doesn't look
like anyone's kind of done
it with the same interface,
focus that we have and
a lot haven't done it
with that ability to that
a lot when they've done
it, they haven't used the
pen. So it's been kind
of an iPad where you
can press your finger and
draw on it, but it
hasn't really given you that
full capability of pen and
touch at the same time.
That's interesting, you know, I
have both an iPad and
a surface and I have
found that, and this is
just, you know, I'm just
speaking as me, it's my
opinion, but it seems like
a lot of iPad apps
are App like application light.
You know what I mean?
There's like, there's word. And
then there's word light and
there's garage band and then
garage band light. And no
one never says light, but
it's always implied that if
it's on a tablet it's
not really full featured. And
I think that most tablets
not just iPad, but also
the windows store kind of
has that implication, that it's
not a real app. It's
a 99 cent app. Yeah. And
that's one of the things
we really actually faced a
little, But a difficulty when
we were going into the
windows store marketplace, when we
decided to develop this as
an app, rather than a
full desktop application, it was
kind of taking a leap
of faith that it wasn't
just going to look like
a 99 cent problem, our program.
And luckily I think we've,
we've hit that very well,
but that was, that was
definitely a worry is during
the development cycle That someone
would look at this and
go, why isn't this a
dollar 99? Exactly. And it's
not, it's a, in my
store at leads, it's a
it's $69, which is, you
know, very competitively priced compared
to other handwriting application apps.
Yeah. So, so I guess
it's, it's very competitive priced,
especially compared to full notation
apps, which is where we
really think it, it fits
in, there's a program called
Sibelius and a program called
finale out there, and these
are multi hundred dollar applications.
That'll let you really kind
of play back and add
all this notation and be
able to do very, very
detailed and tweaking things. But
we've noticed that when people
use them, a lot of
what they're ended up doing
is dragging menus, clicking on
notes, learning these special ways
to enter notes into the
music. And it's not just
like writing music naturally. And
so that was one of
the big focuses when we
developed this app was to
be able to really just
write music naturally right into
the like grind down a
sheet of paper. Interesting. That
kind of makes me, I'm
trying to draw parallels in
my mind to things that
I know better because I
admit that I don't know
much about music, but I
think about creation apps for
like creating art, you know,
Photoshop with a pen or
illustrator with a pen versus,
you know, editing apps after
the fact Photoshop on the
editing side or light room,
do some applications in the
music space, try to straddle
the editing of sheet music
versus the kind of creation
of sheet music. Yeah. I
think it's a largely unexplored
space and I've been, I'm
coming at this from the,
from the developer point of
view rather than necessarily the
musician point of view. So
the, my experience with those
notation apps, I am a
musician as well, but it's
not as advanced as certainly
some people out there, but,
but I definitely wouldn't when
I use those programs, I
see it much more as
an editing tool rather than
really a composition to, I
feel, I can't really be
thinking naturally when I'm, when
I'm trying to use one
of those And do people
who sit down and, and,
and write music from hand
like this, they understand this
music, like, like, like they
like it like someone who
has a sketchpad, like the
it's almost like paper for
the iPad for music. Exactly.
Exactly. Yeah, yeah, Yeah. This
is this, it feels really
natural to me And people
who are composers like your,
like your partner and your
partner in crime here, the,
the composer, David, William Hern.
He, he, I imagined him
sitting with his surface, like
out in a park somewhere,
maybe some headphones on, he
hears music in his head
and he needs to get
it out onto paper as
quickly as possible in an
accurate way. Exactly. Yeah. And
that's, that's the ability you
can't really, I mean, there's
people that have been able
to compose by maybe playing
something on an instrument and
kind of feeding that into
a music composition program. But
usually they're doing this like
in a studio. And so
that's, that's where some of
these more powerful tools actually
happen really, really used to
compose things is when you're
hooking up a live instrument
to it, but you can't
just walk out into the
middle of the park and,
you know, set up your
iPad and, or set up
your Mac and a mini
keyboard and all this stuff.
And just start playing it's
it's here with this. You
could really just take it
into the middle of the
field and start writing music.
Okay. So let's dig into
a little bit of like,
how did you make this?
Is it written in C
sharp? Is it written in
G? Yeah. So it's, so
it's actually all written in
C sharp. And this was,
I had met my first
journey into really C-sharp heavy
applications. Really. Wow. That's impressive.
Because a lot of people
have commented on the, how
polished a staff pet is.
Yeah. So I, this was
a learning project. It's been
a couple of years, so
it's not like something I
figured out overnight, but I
learned a lot about, XAML
a lot about C-sharp in
the last, last couple of
years with us. Were there
any like limitations where you
just slammed up against something?
I was like, Oh, we
cannot do that because, Oh
yeah. Limitation. So I'm not
really sure there, there aren't
any big ones that stick
in my mind. I remember,
and this has been back
a couple of years, but
when I, when I first
started looking into the documentation
of the windows store APIs
versus the full API, is
that you could write on
a windows, desktop. I, there
were some limitations there. And
so occasionally I'd find a
reference to a function that
I really, really wanted to
use, but kind of, but
it seems like over the
years, those limitations have gotten
less and I've been able
to work around most of
the ones that I've still
encountered. I, I wish I
could think of an example
off the top of my
head. No, If you think
of one, you can definitely
jump in. Yeah. So it
sounds like if one's not
at top of mind, it
wasn't nothing major that was
like, Oh, we're screwed and
we're halfway down, but we
can't finish because windows store
apps can't do that. Exactly.
Yeah. There's nothing that ended
up blocking the, the, the
development of the app in
the end, From a perf
perspective. Cause when I use
like drawing apps, like paper
on the iPad, there's always
a complaint that the ink
doesn't get laid down fast
enough or that it's not
responsive enough, you know, frames
per second of the ink
that you're capturing. Did you
have any performance issues? Yeah.
So initially when we did
Did everything with, XAML just
like kind of raw in
strokes and raw drawing lines,
we ended up with with
some performance issues as you
started getting more and information
out on the page. Those
have been less as we've
removed all the rendering code
to C sharp or sorry,
direct X really underneath cover.
So we're using sharp DX
there to, to speed up
a lot of that. And
when you have really a
large score with like 10
instruments and a hundred bars
you'll need that. So you're
not trying to rerender the
entire canvas and the virtualizing
canvas will only get you
so far. And we're, we're
able to do a little
bit more advanced stuff there.
And that's, that's what the
ink that we're laying down
really actually just, you just
re rendering a couple of
XAML lines. And so it's
turned out not to be
a performance issue there. So
we, we did run up
against that, but I want
us to necessarily say that
was a windows store performance
limitation versus a system limitation
in general. So is that,
are you using sharp DX
on top of XAML or
have you replaced AMA with
Sharpies? We're using, yeah, we're
using it on top of
XAML. So we've got like
a canvas. That's the background
for that scrolling middle part
of the app. There's a
kind of a couple of
menu bars at the top
and a mini bar for
the bottom, if you've never
opened the app and then
there's in the middle, there's
a kind of where you
actually are right in the
music. There's a few staves
of, of music and you
can add notes on there.
So that, that middle score
area is the part that's
actually a sharp DX canvas,
but it's on top of
it. XAML canvas element. Very
cool. And for people who
aren't familiar, a sharp DX
is actually an open source
project. It's a free project.
That is a, basically a,
a managed direct X API.
So, and it's, you know,
it happens also work on
the phone or work on
a store apps. So you're,
you're using some open source
software in your application. Yes,
we are more than just
sharp DX. I believe sharp
DX is, is it at
this point, at one point
we were looking at at
different decoding options for the
audio files. So I know
we were playing both with
Augie, decoding and FFmpeg decoding,
and, and honestly, this is
part of where as a
developer, this was not my
area of which it was
just kind of fun to
say. So it's, it's been
great having David as a
partner because he's actually been
able to, to help with
some of the coding that
he's really familiar with. So,
so he's been able to
help a little bit getting
the sound fonts up a
lot of the playback stuff.
And then he's, we've hired
a couple of contractors for
kind of small niche areas
like playing back of the,
the music and getting that
really, really high performance. Cause
I know that's something that
a lot of time was
put into. How do you
get these really? I mean,
we we've recorded full like
instruments playing back at different
pitches in different volumes and
we're cross fading neural time.
So there's a lot of
really neat stuff going on
on under the covers, even
with the playback. Did you
just use the term sound
font? I did. I hope
I used it correctly. It's
interesting because sound fonts Our
25 year old plus concepts.
Can you talk about sound
funds? I, I actually don't
know A lot about sound
fonts, so, so I know
them from the 10,000 foot
perspective, which is basically it's.
If you have an instrument
that you want to play
back the sound of then
than the sound font is
like basically if you have
a font for a computer,
it's how you write the
letter a or write the
letter B well for, for
an, a sound font for
an instrument. It's how you
play the note a or
play the note B Yeah,
yeah. Sound fonts were big
in the mid nineties, late
nineties when sound font, 2.0,
came out. And when people
had the soundblaster sound card,
94, 95, 96, there's a
thing called the all 32.
And it was like the
first sound card that had
sound fonts. And then suddenly
this kind of cheesy synthetic
middy sound suddenly developed richness
and, you know, video games
got a, an almost orchestral
sound to them. Yeah. And
so that's definitely kind of
continued to get better and
better. And, and so it's
not, it doesn't sound like
that cheesy mini playback when
you come out and we're,
so we're doing a few
things on top of that
as well. It's not just
kind of raw sound font
playing back, but really, as
you get louder and crescendo,
it's, it's mixing volumes that
were instruments that were recorded
a softer and louder volume.
So you're not getting just
kind of one stretched example,
really. So you actually did
some custom recording and have
some custom sounds inside to
make it sound the way
you wanted it to sound.
Yeah. So there's, there's some
that we've licensed from other
providers out there that, that
have some of these really
high quality libraries. And then
we've also recorded a few
instruments ourselves. And so we've
been able to use that
the in app purchase feature
of, of Microsoft, of the
app store to give us
the ability to download some
extra, extra sounds. And as
we develop more, we can
keep adding them to the
store. Oh, okay. So what
do I get out of
the box? And then what
can I add Out of
the box? You pretty much
get a full, a full
symphony. So you've got violins
violas, kind of a full
string section, full brass section
horns. I think there's about
10 to 20 drums. Last
I looked of different orchestral
drums. And then if you
want to really buy things
and out on some later
there's things like mandolin and
electric guitars that you can
download from, from the app
store. Now when you're writing
in staph pad and what,
what are this, the sections?
Is it a measure in
between the vertical lines? Yep.
So you kind of write
a measure at a time
and then as soon as
you leave that measure, a
lot of the code that's
going on there, when you,
when you leave the measure,
it turns that into actual
written, Right? So you start
writing and the measure and
the five lines turns red.
And then as soon as
you move to the next
measure that red, it kind
of pauses a moment of
pause. Like it's almost like
it's, are you still writing?
No, he's done. Okay. And
then it immediately gets to
recognize things and then you
have an annotation mode, so
you can go and recognize
your notes, but then you
also can shorten the length
of measures and you can
have stretches and arpeggios between
things. Yeah. So there's a
lot of kind of editing
both in resizing bars. Like
you mentioned, adding more advanced
notation. That's not something you'd
really want to draw or
it'd be just faster to,
to put in by hand
like tremolo markings. And then
there's also, I, I'm not
sure if you were listening
to this, but there's a
sketch overlay layer where you
can really write anything you
want on top of the
bars. If you wanna just
make a note and say,
Hey, I want to rework
this section later. Or if
you want to add a,
kind of a, something that
we don't quite support yet,
some sort of little music
Detail on there. And is
this using a standard file
format that I can move
in between? Like I could
work in staph pad then
using my, my larger desktop
and then move away. Yeah.
We, there's a file format,
a file interchange format for
music notation called music XML.
And so We've implemented as
All the features that we
support on our program. We've
kind of implemented the music
XML equivalent of them. And
so that's the format we
can export to that. And
they're changed with programs like
finale or Sibelius, And you
feel like you're going up
like head to head with
those other big Island. Maybe
I wouldn't say bigger players,
but you know, the, the
more established players. So, so
it's interesting. I feel like
we're really fitting kind of
in this niche between a
couple of different players. Cause
there's, there's a couple of
the handwriting applications for music
that are, what we feel
either is, is a difficult
to use interface or maybe
the recognition isn't up to
par. And so those are
kind of your 10 to
$20 apps that maybe are
available on iPad, where, where
the interface really isn't quite
good enough to be able
to do this correctly. And
then we have the applications
like Fanelli and Sibelius, which
are really kind of professional
level on grieving tools. And
so we, we only, We
support a subset of the
features that a program like
that would cost, but we're
also a subset of the
features of the program like
that would have, but we're
also about a 10th of
the cost. Oh wow. And
so it's, it's this ability
for composers that are like
in school to be able
to have something that they
can really work with. And,
and we're increasingly getting more
and more of the features
that those programs have and
more of the editing capabilities
that they have. And so,
so I don't want to
say we're direct competition for
those. I, I see it
more as a complimentary system
where you write something really
quickly or naturally with, with
staff hat and then you
would then export it. And
if you really wanted to
tweak layout or add some
esoteric things on top of
it, you could do that.
And one of these, these
other, And have you had
updates or put out any
updates since it came out
with 1.0, We have not
yet. So we've been working
hard on getting version 2.0
out and, and we're actually
uploading that to the store
within the next couple of
days now. Oh, wow. Okay.
Cool. Is there any, any
particular feature that people would
be really impressed with? Yeah,
there's a number of small
things we're working on. There's,
there's been a lot of
people that want to be
able to do, for example,
custom score ordering, so be
able to rearrange the instruments.
And so we've, we've implemented
that we've implemented at more
advanced time signatures. Now you
can kind of set arbitrary
numbers for the time signatures
and there's a lot of
small improvements we've made under
the cover to recognition to
the print engine, the layout
engine. So, so I think
people will be impressed. There's,
we're kind of putting together
a long list of, of
all the changes that we've
made. And we've tried to,
there's been a lot of
people that are giving us
a lot of good feedback
and, and seem to be
really interested in the program.
And so we're trying to
address as much of their
kind of first round of
feedback that we can, and
then work on the bigger
things for the next step.
I want to take a
moment to thank our sponsors,
sync, fusion, sync fusions, mobile
web, and desktop controls are
trusted worldwide, but did you
know that they also provide
educational resources? The succinctly series
of free eBooks has great
content on popular technologies and
100 completely ad free pages.
These books are written by
industry experts and topics range
from Cassandra to no JS
to windows 8.1. They're available
for Kindle apps and in
PDF format and new eBooks
are released each month. So
Brown's their library@syncfusion.com to download
your free ebook today. We're
getting, getting back to the
basics a little bit because
I'm fascinated by like the,
the actual, you know, the,
is it called? What is
it called? The, all of
the lines. The staff staff
is that, is that done
in fonts? Is that entirely
laid out by you? Is
that written from scratch? So
there's a couple different pieces
that go together. Some of
that, like just the lines
horizontally across those are written
that that's just like a
drawing line, primitive. So work
using Sharpie accent saying, draw
this line now for things
like note, heads and flags
on the notes and class,
that's something that there's, there's
kind of a different type
of sound font that's out
there. It's a, it's kind
of a notation font. And
so we're using one of
those. That'll actually give us
the characters for the different,
different kinds of notes that
you'd want to put on.
And then we can, is
it a Unicode or an
open type font? Yeah, it's
a, it's a Unicode true
type font and there's a
special range of characters. So
one of the problems historically,
and music notation applications that
it's kind of been this
really weird over mapped standard
font, that's kind of been
extended. So maybe Q on
the notepad stands for quarter
note or, and there's just,
it kind of jumps around
and ours is maybe a
quarter rest, but then there's
another note or another key
entirely. That means they throw.
So there's not any real
standard. And I'll tell you,
you're saying that it's an
uncomfortable mapping between 26 letters
in English or Latin, the
Latin key keyboards and music,
which is just simply not
a spoken language. Exactly. And
so there's actually been a
project that we've taken advantage
and open source project out
there to try to remap
this into a sensible way.
And so that's, it's called
SMU F L I, I
forget what that's actually stands
for. It's a, but it's
a new music markup format.
And so kind of defines
where this whole set of
36 or there's this range
of characters in the Unicode
set, defines all the notes.
And so it's kind of
grouping things sensibly and making
it a lot more easy
to work with. It's a
more sensible mapping. So that's,
that's the standard music font
layout. So Burt came up
with exactly Interesting. So then,
you know, cause fonts, musical
notes and fonts like that
idea of like, Hey, wait
a second fonts. We can
do music that happened in
like 1984, 1995 when Adobe
came out with Sonata. But
the thing that's so interesting,
I think about music as
it relates to fonts and
languages is if you think
about doing Latin type languages,
that's easy, each character is
separate, but then you add
ligatures and things that attach
to other things and then
things get complicated. Yeah. And
so, especially with, with the
layout of the score, there's
a lot that you can't
just do with, with kind
of fonts and lectures. You
can't put these two notes
beside each other and trust
them to be the same
distance away. So it ends
up, you're positioning a lot
of the core elements, very
carefully on the score, like
the note heads. And then
a lot of the things
that are simple, straight lines
like stems and beams, you're
actually drawing those primitives yourself,
fusion, sharp DX, or dirt
using whatever graphics library you
want. So you're kind of
really combining positioning font, symbols,
exactly. Along with a bunch
of drawing primitives and having
to line that up very
carefully and as well, spaced
out very carefully. So there's
a lot of work that
we put in to kind
of arrange in the layout
of the music on the
page. I see. So you
might, you know, say, Oh,
you know, Unicode cone point,
EO two is a bracket,
but we need a really
tall one and it has
to be pixel perfect. And
has to be here. Exactly.
So we'll end up stretching
that letter for example. Oh,
wow. And that is that
expected? Is this the way
that, that they expect one
to use these glyphs? Yes.
Yeah. It was very, the
program was very much or
the, sorry, the font was
very much designed for this.
Very cool. And it looks
gorgeous. That is the thing,
because this is a fact
a kind of font these
and, you know, and they
did a nice mapping to
the Unicode stuff. They, it
looks great. It scales nice
as well. I was a
little bit surprised. I just
assumed somehow that it would
be only one, you know,
100%, but it zooms very
naturally. So you can zoom
in, make a tiny little
annotation and then zoom right
back out and it looks
perfect the whole time. Yeah.
And I have to give
credit to the guys at
Steinberg, who they put together,
we're using the river font
package, which is their implementation
of their standard. And it's
a great looking font. Yeah.
Yeah. And does this work
on, you know, high Rez
machines? Like I know that
the surface is very high
Rez and the new surface
three, not the pro it
has a much lower Rez.
Does it look good at
any size? Yeah, we, we
have found that it looks
pretty good at Any size.
We, we actually got the
chance to see it on
a surface hub. And even
at that giant, you mean
the giant 100? Yeah. Was
it 184 or something like
that? Yeah. And so it's,
it's amazing to see kind
of the score just on
this giant screen and it
just worked no, No weird
IDP, high DPI things. It
just looked great. It scaled.
Yeah. Yeah. Everything's scaled pretty
well. No, that was a
little, a little nerve wracking
to see that and actually
see that everything kind of
kind of carried over, I
guess it's, it's a Testament
to a lot of the
frameworks, the XAML and everything
that we built off of
it, but, well, that's also
a really cool scenario. I
hope you got videos That,
or you can put that
on Instagram somewhere, because I
mean, imagine if, if a
composer could sit there with
their orchestra and a surface
hub and work on a
score as a team with
this hundred inch giant television.
Yeah. I think that'd be
a pretty neat experience. I
imagine some composers might kind
of see that like a
backseat driver that True. True.
Have you seen this being
used already in an academic
scenario? Like this is a,
be a great way to
teach people how to read
and write music? Yeah. We've,
we've seen a couple kind
of great responses on the
being able to use this
in an academic setting or
an educational setting for music
classes. And so one of
our favorites that I think
it was a group of
middle schoolers and their teacher
used this to, to write
some music on the, on
the whiteboards or not the
whiteboard screen, but kind of
her projected surface screen. And
then after that, she actually
handed the computer around to
the kids and they each
wrote a different bar music
with it. In the end,
they kind of had this
composition and the, the teacher
added in the little harmony
and play back and then
press tech sport and has
an MP3 on the, on
the internet that the kids
can go home and listen
to. That's fantastic. And how
did you, how did you
hook up with, with your
partner, David William Harun? Like I
understand that you had some
page on Google code. It
seems like you guys may
have each been thinking about
how to write an app
like this separately and then
found each other somehow. Exactly.
Yeah. So I had an
open source project that I,
that I tried to start,
Oh, five, six years ago.
Now I'd done a lot
of transcribing music by hand
in, into kind of these
more expensive notation apps. And
it was just taking forever.
And so I was looking
for a better way to
do that and kind of
stumbled across this idea. And
he had independently stumbled across
this idea and I had
this open source project that
I'd just started and hadn't
really had a whole lot
of time to, to work
out the details. And he
saw that and kind of
emailed me out of the
blue and took a, took
a little bit to decide
we weren't each person wasn't
crazy. But a few years
later we've made a law,
a lot of progress on
it. So you've said a
few years, it sounds like
this is one of those
examples of an app. That's
an overnight, overnight success that
took several years to make.
Yeah. So it it's been
in production about three years
now. We've kind of been
in skunk mode for the
last few years. So you
were literally Like working on
this in stealth mode and
you just dropped it in
a nice, awesome, you know,
kind of coordinated way. Like
no one knew this was
happening. Yeah. We, we managed
to keep it pretty quiet
over the last few years.
It was that it's just
so stressful. I mean, I
just try to imagine like
multiple years long to not
talk about it. I mean,
we, yeah, it was there,
there were times where your
friends knew about it, So
you can talk to it
with family and friends, but
there's definitely times that I
wanted to be able to
say a little more than
we could Where you can't
exactly go. I suppose you
didn't have like, am I
going to go look at
your stack overflow and find
like, Oh, I can see
where he was having trouble
with fonts right there. Aloha,
you know, you might find
a couple of Questions on
the Microsoft board and I'm
trying to still struggle with
the blob upload service or
various learning different things along
the way. Yeah. Huh. I
understand also that there's a
little bit of C plus
plus in this application, is
that right? Yeah. So the
C plus plus is mainly
in the audio playback library.
What kinda stuff do you
have to do? Like what,
what was it that was
not easy to do or
not from a performance perspective
needed to be done in
C plus plus. So I
think just being able to
know, And again, this is,
I was on kind of
every area except the audio
playback. So I apologize if
I'm a little ignorant. I
see. So we're into David's
area. Now This is, this
is David on a couple
of the contractors we, we
found to help us. So
the, but the 99% Cincy
plus sentence, assuming C sharp
rather. And then C plus
plus is where the sampler
and the reverb and some
of them are high performance
stuff. Exactly. And is there
a backend service at all?
Is there anything in Azure
or something up in the
cloud that supports it or
is it its own standalone
thing? So it's Program, but
we are using Azure to
actually that the user has
an option. When they have
a, a musical bar that's
not recognized properly, they can
just go ahead and hit
a button and report that
and send it to us.
So then it can kind
of look through and see
where people are having trouble
with recognition. And so we're
using Azure to host that.
Okay. That's cool. So you've
got a little bit of
bug reporting there. Do you
have any kind of error
reporting or a system like
Reagan or something where if
the app crashes you get
the stack dump mailed to
you? Unfortunately, no, that's, that's
something we definitely want to
want to try to add
in, in the next release.
Oh yeah. Well like they,
these guys that just to
take a quick second, but
Reagan, they use, they sponsored
us a couple of weeks
ago, but they are a
really cool company, reagan.io. And
basically it's a global error
handler and then it takes
every crash that gets sent
and automatically categorizes them. And
then it will even say
this error that you thought
you fixed, it's recurring again
and here is what happened.
It's pretty awesome stuff. That
sounds like that'd be great.
Yeah, that would be perfect.
So you've got version two
coming out, you're in the
windows store. Why and when
did you make the decision
that it would be a
windows app and not on
an iPad with a stylist?
Yes. We actually spent a
good deal of the first,
probably the first year as
we're getting a lot of
the basic interface stuff. And
a lot of the basic
recognition code, we spent a
while targeting Java because we
figured this to be a
nice cross platform. And then
we'd have people plug in
an external graphics tablet to
use it really. And then
the surface came out and
we just found that you
could, you know, draw right
on the screen and it
made everything more intuitive. And
so that was really the
turning point is we kind
of took a leap of
faith there trying to try
to do a creative app
on a, on a windows
device, which is certainly not,
not really a standard thing
that's done these days. There's,
I mean, there's, there's a
great Adobe creative suite and
everything that works on windows,
but a lot of music
apps really are, are more,
more Macintosh. Well, yeah. And
I think also that people
may have watched and said,
Oh, well, Microsoft must've paid
them. Or this was a
lot of people thought it
was a Microsoft app, but
you, you came to those
decisions on your own and
kind of found your way
onto the surface. Yeah. Occasionally
I'll see that on a
blog and I'll kind of
laugh it off the person's
like, I know they must
have gotten paid for Microsoft
and I wish we could
say that Microsoft sent us
a lot of money, but
They actually know that you
were doing this. Like when
did Microsoft figure out that
this existed The last few
months before the release, we'd
been talking to some people
at Microsoft and letting them
know what was going on.
And I think this, this
started kind of when we
were asking some questions and,
and having some, a few
troubles along the way, understanding
particulars of the store particulars
of a particular like PDF
export, for example, that we're
trying to get to work.
And so it got us
in contact with a few
of the areas of Microsoft
and they've become aware. And
actually one of the reasons
we, we released it when
we did, was to correspond
with the surface three release
announcement. And so at the
end of that, that timing
actually worked out based on,
on something. We had been
told a little bit by
Microsoft. Oh, I see. So
when you, when they, when
you started asking enough questions
and they started to get
like, put it together, they
were like, Hey, you know,
we got this thing coming
out. You might want to
line it up. That's pretty
cool. Yeah. It was great
for us. And I think,
I think it ended up
helping them too. So, And
it works good on a
surface three. Like it's a
less powered machine. If I,
if I have a student
or I a, a relative
who is, you know, high
school or college student who
wants to do this, a
surface three plus staff pad
would be a good environment
for them to compose music.
Yeah. So I I've actually
been able to, to test
a little bit on a
development surface three and, and
it seems to work pretty
well on there. It's starts
having a little bit of
performance issues, you know, when
you get to much larger
scores. So if you're dealing
with seven, 10 instruments and
you try to play back,
all those playing fast notes
at once the sound library
is really going to be
digging up a lot. And
so we're trying to work
and see if we can
even improve that performance. I
see. But presumably you could
render it and then play
it and then it would
work. Yeah. So we, we
might be able to preprocess,
we might be able to
reload a preload, some, some
of the information and, and
work on that. It's kind
of a trade off on,
on what makes sense. What
are the resources that staff
had uses that it uses
the most? Is it CPU
bound or is it memory
heavy? Like it's doing work
and I'm not implying it
all in any way that
it's bloated. I'm saying that
it does a lot of
work. What kind of work
does it do? Yeah. So
I think there's, there's a
couple different categories of the
things that are probably most
resource-intensive. One is the playback.
One is the graphics and
then one is the recognition.
And so the, the playback
is a mix of memory
because we're loading in a
lot of samples so we
can access them very quickly.
So, so it's kind of
a mix of memory and
CPU there. The rendering is
really CPU heavy and then
the recognition is just kind
of bleak, brief little bits
of, of CPU heaviness. So
we, we try to, precompute
sambal. You just, can't quite
precompute everything before we, we
have to move on to
the next bar and it
decides to recognize right. Then
I see. So you can't,
it's not like a rendering
in the sense of wait
five minutes and then I'll
play this thing for five
minutes. You render in play
and you kind of buffer
and render and play and
buffer and under play so
that you can start playing
as quickly as possible. Yeah.
I suppose to the user,
it just feels like they
push play and it starts
playing. Exactly. And so we
agreed can preload a little
bit of stuff, but really
it's mostly, preloading the samples
in first. Very cool. And
this is all@staphpad.net and really
currently, and only on the
windows, the windows store. Absolutely.
Yeah. We, and again, it's,
it's one of those things
where there's not another device
out there really that supports
pen and touch. And I,
I'm not a windows of
Angela start. So it's, it's,
it's definitely not me. I
can be in paid by
Microsoft or anything. I just,
it's, it's amazing that it's
this device out there that
really kind of seamlessly blends
those two together in a,
in a really useful way.
And you didn't have any
issues with the pen, like
the pen did and worked
exactly as it's supposed to
work and you treat it
as a pan. Like you
can tell the difference between
when the pen is touching
the screen and when your
fingers touching the screen. And
that's actually one of the
big keys that is the
reason we couldn't do it
on something like an iPad.
Ah, that depends on the
iPad really aren't well, first
of all, they don't, they
don't have the performance that
the, the windows pens have
just let out, So they're
not pens. And then it
can't really tell technically, unless
you have like something like
the paper, there's a company
called paper and they have
an actual custom Bluetooth pen
called a pencil creatively named
those things are basically their
own custom thing. But most
stylist is in an iPad
or just a little tiny
fingers. Exactly. They're just duplicated
in the fingers. And so
then you can't be drawing
and then instantly scrolling, like
drawing with your pen and
scrolling with your fingers that
just doesn't can't tell those
parts. Yeah. Yeah. The demo
video at staff, pat.net is
really crazy because you're, the
person is basically moving the
pen, flips it over, use
it, the eraser then uses
their finger and basically has
three different interaction models within
seconds. And it's extremely natural
and very different from, from
doing something only touch. Exactly.
Very cool. Thanks so much
for chatting with me today.
I really appreciate it. Oh,
thank you so much for
having me on the show.
This has been another episode
of Hanselminutes and we'll see
you again next week.